---
title: "Headings and sections"
description: ""
lead: ""
date: 2020-10-06T08:48:57+00:00
lastmod: 2020-10-06T08:48:57+00:00
draft: false
images: []
menu:
  docs:
    parent: "ext"
weight: 280
toc: true
---

#### Extension: `auto_identifiers` ####

A heading without an explicitly specified identifier will be
automatically assigned a unique identifier based on the heading text.

This extension can be enabled/disabled for the following formats:

input formats
:  `markdown`, `latex`, `rst`, `mediawiki`, `textile`

output formats
:  `markdown`, `muse`

enabled by default in
:  `markdown`, `muse`

The default algorithm used to derive the identifier from the
heading text is:

  - Remove all formatting, links, etc.
  - Remove all footnotes.
  - Remove all non-alphanumeric characters,
    except underscores, hyphens, and periods.
  - Replace all spaces and newlines with hyphens.
  - Convert all alphabetic characters to lowercase.
  - Remove everything up to the first letter (identifiers may
    not begin with a number or punctuation mark).
  - If nothing is left after this, use the identifier `section`.

Thus, for example,

  Heading                           Identifier
  -------------------------------   ----------------------------
  `Heading identifiers in HTML`     `heading-identifiers-in-html`
  `Maître d'hôtel`                  `maître-dhôtel`
  `*Dogs*?--in *my* house?`         `dogs--in-my-house`
  `[HTML], [S5], or [RTF]?`         `html-s5-or-rtf`
  `3. Applications`                 `applications`
  `33`                              `section`

These rules should, in most cases, allow one to determine the identifier
from the heading text. The exception is when several headings have the
same text; in this case, the first will get an identifier as described
above; the second will get the same identifier with `-1` appended; the
third with `-2`; and so on.

(However, a different algorithm is used if
`gfm_auto_identifiers` is enabled; see below.)

These identifiers are used to provide link targets in the table of
contents generated by the `--toc|--table-of-contents` option. They
also make it easy to provide links from one section of a document to
another. A link to this section, for example, might look like this:

    See the section on
    [heading identifiers](#heading-identifiers-in-html-latex-and-context).

Note, however, that this method of providing links to sections works
only in HTML, LaTeX, and ConTeXt formats.

If the `--section-divs` option is specified, then each section will
be wrapped in a `section` (or a `div`, if `html4` was specified),
and the identifier will be attached to the enclosing `<section>`
(or `<div>`) tag rather than the heading itself. This allows entire
sections to be manipulated using JavaScript or treated differently in
CSS.

#### Extension: `ascii_identifiers` ####

Causes the identifiers produced by `auto_identifiers` to be pure ASCII.
Accents are stripped off of accented Latin letters, and non-Latin
letters are omitted.

#### Extension: `gfm_auto_identifiers` ####

Changes the algorithm used by `auto_identifiers` to conform to
GitHub's method.  Spaces are converted to dashes (`-`),
uppercase characters to lowercase characters, and punctuation
characters other than `-` and `_` are removed.
Emojis are replaced by their names.
