# Description

Pandoc is a [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org) library for converting
from one markup format to another, and a command-line tool that uses
this library.

Pandoc can convert between numerous markup and word processing formats,
including, but not limited to, various flavors of
[Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/),
[HTML](https://www.w3.org/html/),
[LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/) and [Word
docx](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_Open_XML). For the full lists
of input and output formats, see the `--from` and `--to` [options
below](#general-options). Pandoc can also produce
[PDF](https://www.adobe.com/pdf/) output: see [creating a
PDF](#creating-a-pdf), below.

Pandoc’s enhanced version of Markdown includes syntax for
[tables](#tables), [definition lists](#definition-lists), [metadata
blocks](#metadata-blocks), [footnotes](#footnotes),
[citations](#citations), [math](#math), and much more. See below under
[Pandoc’s Markdown](#pandocs-markdown).

Pandoc has a modular design: it consists of a set of readers, which
parse text in a given format and produce a native representation of the
document (an *abstract syntax tree* or AST), and a set of writers, which
convert this native representation into a target format. Thus, adding an
input or output format requires only adding a reader or writer. Users
can also run custom [pandoc filters](https://pandoc.org/filters.html) to
modify the intermediate AST.

Because pandoc’s intermediate representation of a document is less
expressive than many of the formats it converts between, one should not
expect perfect conversions between every format and every other. Pandoc
attempts to preserve the structural elements of a document, but not
formatting details such as margin size. And some document elements, such
as complex tables, may not fit into pandoc’s simple document model.
While conversions from pandoc’s Markdown to all formats aspire to be
perfect, conversions from formats more expressive than pandoc’s Markdown
can be expected to be lossy.

## Using pandoc

If no *input-files* are specified, input is read from *stdin*. Output
goes to *stdout* by default. For output to a file, use the `-o` option:

    pandoc -o output.html input.txt

By default, pandoc produces a document fragment. To produce a standalone
document (e.g. a valid HTML file including `<head>` and `<body>`), use
the `-s` or `--standalone` flag:

    pandoc -s -o output.html input.txt

For more information on how standalone documents are produced, see
[Templates](#templates) below.

If multiple input files are given, pandoc will concatenate them all
(with blank lines between them) before parsing. (Use `--file-scope` to
parse files individually.)

## Specifying formats

The format of the input and output can be specified explicitly using
command-line options. The input format can be specified using the
`-f/--from` option, the output format using the `-t/--to` option. Thus,
to convert `hello.txt` from Markdown to LaTeX, you could type:

    pandoc -f markdown -t latex hello.txt

To convert `hello.html` from HTML to Markdown:

    pandoc -f html -t markdown hello.html

Supported input and output formats are listed below under
[Options](#options) (see `-f` for input formats and `-t` for output
formats). You can also use `pandoc --list-input-formats` and
`pandoc --list-output-formats` to print lists of supported formats.

If the input or output format is not specified explicitly, pandoc will
attempt to guess it from the extensions of the filenames. Thus, for
example,

    pandoc -o hello.tex hello.txt

will convert `hello.txt` from Markdown to LaTeX. If no output file is
specified (so that output goes to *stdout*), or if the output file’s
extension is unknown, the output format will default to HTML. If no
input file is specified (so that input comes from *stdin*), or if the
input files’ extensions are unknown, the input format will be assumed to
be Markdown.

## Character encoding

Pandoc uses the UTF-8 character encoding for both input and output. If
your local character encoding is not UTF-8, you should pipe input and
output through [`iconv`](https://www.gnu.org/software/libiconv/):

    iconv -t utf-8 input.txt | pandoc | iconv -f utf-8

Note that in some output formats (such as HTML, LaTeX, ConTeXt, RTF,
OPML, DocBook, and Texinfo), information about the character encoding is
included in the document header, which will only be included if you use
the `-s/--standalone` option.

## Creating a PDF

To produce a PDF, specify an output file with a `.pdf` extension:

    pandoc test.txt -o test.pdf

By default, pandoc will use LaTeX to create the PDF, which requires that
a LaTeX engine be installed (see `--pdf-engine` below). Alternatively,
pandoc can use ConTeXt, roff ms, or HTML as an intermediate format. To
do this, specify an output file with a `.pdf` extension, as before, but
add the `--pdf-engine` option or `-t context`, `-t html`, or `-t ms` to
the command line. The tool used to generate the PDF from the
intermediate format may be specified using `--pdf-engine`.

You can control the PDF style using variables, depending on the
intermediate format used: see [variables for
LaTeX](#variables-for-latex), [variables for
ConTeXt](#variables-for-context), [variables for
`wkhtmltopdf`](#variables-for-wkhtmltopdf), [variables for
ms](#variables-for-ms). When HTML is used as an intermediate format, the
output can be styled using `--css`.

To debug the PDF creation, it can be useful to look at the intermediate
representation: instead of `-o test.pdf`, use for example
`-s -o test.tex` to output the generated LaTeX. You can then test it
with `pdflatex test.tex`.

When using LaTeX, the following packages need to be available (they are
included with all recent versions of [TeX
Live](https://www.tug.org/texlive/)):
[`amsfonts`](https://ctan.org/pkg/amsfonts),
[`amsmath`](https://ctan.org/pkg/amsmath),
[`lm`](https://ctan.org/pkg/lm),
[`unicode-math`](https://ctan.org/pkg/unicode-math),
[`iftex`](https://ctan.org/pkg/iftex),
[`listings`](https://ctan.org/pkg/listings) (if the `--listings` option
is used), [`fancyvrb`](https://ctan.org/pkg/fancyvrb),
[`longtable`](https://ctan.org/pkg/longtable),
[`booktabs`](https://ctan.org/pkg/booktabs), \[`multirow`\] (if the
document contains a table with cells that cross multiple rows),
[`graphicx`](https://ctan.org/pkg/graphicx) (if the document contains
images), [`bookmark`](https://ctan.org/pkg/bookmark),
[`xcolor`](https://ctan.org/pkg/xcolor),
[`soul`](https://ctan.org/pkg/soul),
[`geometry`](https://ctan.org/pkg/geometry) (with the `geometry`
variable set), [`setspace`](https://ctan.org/pkg/setspace) (with
`linestretch`), and [`babel`](https://ctan.org/pkg/babel) (with `lang`).
If `CJKmainfont` is set, [`xeCJK`](https://ctan.org/pkg/xecjk) is needed
if `xelatex` is used, else [`luatexja`](https://ctan.org/pkg/luatexja)
is needed if `lualatex` is used. [`framed`](https://ctan.org/pkg/framed)
is required if code is highlighted in a scheme that use a colored
background. The use of `xelatex` or `lualatex` as the PDF engine
requires [`fontspec`](https://ctan.org/pkg/fontspec). `lualatex` uses
[`selnolig`](https://ctan.org/pkg/selnolig) and
[`lua-ul`](https://ctan.org/pkg/lua-ul). `xelatex` uses
[`bidi`](https://ctan.org/pkg/bidi) (with the `dir` variable set). If
the `mathspec` variable is set, `xelatex` will use
[`mathspec`](https://ctan.org/pkg/mathspec) instead of
[`unicode-math`](https://ctan.org/pkg/unicode-math). The
[`upquote`](https://ctan.org/pkg/upquote) and
[`microtype`](https://ctan.org/pkg/microtype) packages are used if
available, and [`csquotes`](https://ctan.org/pkg/csquotes) will be used
for [typography](#typography) if the `csquotes` variable or metadata
field is set to a true value. The
[`natbib`](https://ctan.org/pkg/natbib),
[`biblatex`](https://ctan.org/pkg/biblatex),
[`bibtex`](https://ctan.org/pkg/bibtex), and
[`biber`](https://ctan.org/pkg/biber) packages can optionally be used
for [citation rendering](#citation-rendering). The following packages
will be used to improve output quality if present, but pandoc does not
require them to be present: [`upquote`](https://ctan.org/pkg/upquote)
(for straight quotes in verbatim environments),
[`microtype`](https://ctan.org/pkg/microtype) (for better spacing
adjustments), [`parskip`](https://ctan.org/pkg/parskip) (for better
inter-paragraph spaces), [`xurl`](https://ctan.org/pkg/xurl) (for better
line breaks in URLs), and
[`footnotehyper`](https://ctan.org/pkg/footnotehyper) or
[`footnote`](https://ctan.org/pkg/footnote) (to allow footnotes in
tables).

## Reading from the Web

Instead of an input file, an absolute URI may be given. In this case
pandoc will fetch the content using HTTP:

    pandoc -f html -t markdown https://www.fsf.org

It is possible to supply a custom User-Agent string or other header when
requesting a document from a URL:

    pandoc -f html -t markdown --request-header User-Agent:"Mozilla/5.0" \
      https://www.fsf.org

