# Slide shows

You can use pandoc to produce an HTML + JavaScript slide presentation
that can be viewed via a web browser. There are five ways to do this,
using [S5](https://meyerweb.com/eric/tools/s5/),
[DZSlides](https://paulrouget.com/dzslides/),
[Slidy](https://www.w3.org/Talks/Tools/Slidy2/),
[Slideous](https://goessner.net/articles/slideous/), or
[reveal.js](https://revealjs.com/). You can also produce a PDF slide
show using LaTeX [`beamer`](https://ctan.org/pkg/beamer), or slide shows
in Microsoft
[PowerPoint](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_PowerPoint) format.

Here’s the Markdown source for a simple slide show, `habits.txt`:

    % Habits
    % John Doe
    % March 22, 2005

    # In the morning

    ## Getting up

    - Turn off alarm
    - Get out of bed

    ## Breakfast

    - Eat eggs
    - Drink coffee

    # In the evening

    ## Dinner

    - Eat spaghetti
    - Drink wine

    ------------------

    ![picture of spaghetti](images/spaghetti.jpg)

    ## Going to sleep

    - Get in bed
    - Count sheep

To produce an HTML/JavaScript slide show, simply type

    pandoc -t FORMAT -s habits.txt -o habits.html

where `FORMAT` is either `s5`, `slidy`, `slideous`, `dzslides`, or
`revealjs`.

For Slidy, Slideous, reveal.js, and S5, the file produced by pandoc with
the `-s/--standalone` option embeds a link to JavaScript and CSS files,
which are assumed to be available at the relative path `s5/default` (for
S5), `slideous` (for Slideous), `reveal.js` (for reveal.js), or at the
Slidy website at `w3.org` (for Slidy). (These paths can be changed by
setting the `slidy-url`, `slideous-url`, `revealjs-url`, or `s5-url`
variables; see [Variables for HTML slides](#variables-for-html-slides),
above.) For DZSlides, the (relatively short) JavaScript and CSS are
included in the file by default.

With all HTML slide formats, the `--self-contained` option can be used
to produce a single file that contains all of the data necessary to
display the slide show, including linked scripts, stylesheets, images,
and videos.

To produce a PDF slide show using beamer, type

    pandoc -t beamer habits.txt -o habits.pdf

Note that a reveal.js slide show can also be converted to a PDF by
printing it to a file from the browser.

To produce a PowerPoint slide show, type

    pandoc habits.txt -o habits.pptx

## Structuring the slide show

By default, the *slide level* is the highest heading level in the
hierarchy that is followed immediately by content, and not another
heading, somewhere in the document. In the example above, level-1
headings are always followed by level-2 headings, which are followed by
content, so the slide level is 2. This default can be overridden using
the `--slide-level` option.

The document is carved up into slides according to the following rules:

- A horizontal rule always starts a new slide.

- A heading at the slide level always starts a new slide.

- Headings *below* the slide level in the hierarchy create headings
  *within* a slide. (In beamer, a “block” will be created. If the
  heading has the class `example`, an `exampleblock` environment will be
  used; if it has the class `alert`, an `alertblock` will be used;
  otherwise a regular `block` will be used.)

- Headings *above* the slide level in the hierarchy create “title
  slides,” which just contain the section title and help to break the
  slide show into sections. Non-slide content under these headings will
  be included on the title slide (for HTML slide shows) or in a
  subsequent slide with the same title (for beamer).

- A title page is constructed automatically from the document’s title
  block, if present. (In the case of beamer, this can be disabled by
  commenting out some lines in the default template.)

These rules are designed to support many different styles of slide show.
If you don’t care about structuring your slides into sections and
subsections, you can either just use level-1 headings for all slides (in
that case, level 1 will be the slide level) or you can set
`--slide-level=0`.

Note: in reveal.js slide shows, if slide level is 2, a two-dimensional
layout will be produced, with level-1 headings building horizontally and
level-2 headings building vertically. It is not recommended that you use
deeper nesting of section levels with reveal.js unless you set
`--slide-level=0` (which lets reveal.js produce a one-dimensional layout
and only interprets horizontal rules as slide boundaries).

### PowerPoint layout choice

When creating slides, the pptx writer chooses from a number of
pre-defined layouts, based on the content of the slide:

Title Slide  
This layout is used for the initial slide, which is generated and filled
from the metadata fields `date`, `author`, and `title`, if they are
present.

Section Header  
This layout is used for what pandoc calls “title slides”, i.e. slides
which start with a header which is above the slide level in the
hierarchy.

Two Content  
This layout is used for two-column slides, i.e. slides containing a div
with class `columns` which contains at least two divs with class
`column`.

Comparison  
This layout is used instead of “Two Content” for any two-column slides
in which at least one column contains text followed by non-text (e.g. an
image or a table).

Content with Caption  
This layout is used for any non-two-column slides which contain text
followed by non-text (e.g. an image or a table).

Blank  
This layout is used for any slides which only contain blank content,
e.g. a slide containing only speaker notes, or a slide containing only a
non-breaking space.

Title and Content  
This layout is used for all slides which do not match the criteria for
another layout.

These layouts are chosen from the default pptx reference doc included
with pandoc, unless an alternative reference doc is specified using
`--reference-doc`.

## Incremental lists

By default, these writers produce lists that display “all at once.” If
you want your lists to display incrementally (one item at a time), use
the `-i` option. If you want a particular list to depart from the
default, put it in a `div` block with class `incremental` or
`nonincremental`. So, for example, using the `fenced div` syntax, the
following would be incremental regardless of the document default:

    ::: incremental

    - Eat spaghetti
    - Drink wine

    :::

or

    ::: nonincremental

    - Eat spaghetti
    - Drink wine

    :::

While using `incremental` and `nonincremental` divs is the recommended
method of setting incremental lists on a per-case basis, an older method
is also supported: putting lists inside a blockquote will depart from
the document default (that is, it will display incrementally without the
`-i` option and all at once with the `-i` option):

    > - Eat spaghetti
    > - Drink wine

Both methods allow incremental and nonincremental lists to be mixed in a
single document.

If you want to include a block-quoted list, you can work around this
behavior by putting the list inside a fenced div, so that it is not the
direct child of the block quote:

    > ::: wrapper
    > - a
    > - list in a quote
    > :::

## Inserting pauses

You can add “pauses” within a slide by including a paragraph containing
three dots, separated by spaces:

    # Slide with a pause

    content before the pause

    . . .

    content after the pause

Note: this feature is not yet implemented for PowerPoint output.

## Styling the slides

You can change the style of HTML slides by putting customized CSS files
in `$DATADIR/s5/default` (for S5), `$DATADIR/slidy` (for Slidy), or
`$DATADIR/slideous` (for Slideous), where `$DATADIR` is the user data
directory (see `--data-dir`, above). The originals may be found in
pandoc’s system data directory (generally
`$CABALDIR/pandoc-VERSION/s5/default`). Pandoc will look there for any
files it does not find in the user data directory.

For dzslides, the CSS is included in the HTML file itself, and may be
modified there.

All [reveal.js configuration options](https://revealjs.com/config/) can
be set through variables. For example, themes can be used by setting the
`theme` variable:

    -V theme=moon

Or you can specify a custom stylesheet using the `--css` option.

To style beamer slides, you can specify a `theme`, `colortheme`,
`fonttheme`, `innertheme`, and `outertheme`, using the `-V` option:

    pandoc -t beamer habits.txt -V theme:Warsaw -o habits.pdf

Note that heading attributes will turn into slide attributes (on a
`<div>` or `<section>`) in HTML slide formats, allowing you to style
individual slides. In beamer, a number of heading classes and attributes
are recognized as frame options and will be passed through as options to
the frame: see [Frame attributes in
beamer](#frame-attributes-in-beamer), below.

## Speaker notes

Speaker notes are supported in reveal.js, PowerPoint (pptx), and beamer
output. You can add notes to your Markdown document thus:

    ::: notes

    This is my note.

    - It can contain Markdown
    - like this list

    :::

To show the notes window in reveal.js, press `s` while viewing the
presentation. Speaker notes in PowerPoint will be available, as usual,
in handouts and presenter view.

Notes are not yet supported for other slide formats, but the notes will
not appear on the slides themselves.

## Columns

To put material in side by side columns, you can use a native div
container with class `columns`, containing two or more div containers
with class `column` and a `width` attribute:

    :::::::::::::: {.columns}
    ::: {.column width="40%"}
    contents...
    :::
    ::: {.column width="60%"}
    contents...
    :::
    ::::::::::::::

### Additional columns attributes in beamer

The div containers with classes `columns` and `column` can optionally
have an `align` attribute. The class `columns` can optionally have a
`totalwidth` attribute or an `onlytextwidth` class.

    :::::::::::::: {.columns align=center totalwidth=8em}
    ::: {.column width="40%"}
    contents...
    :::
    ::: {.column width="60%" align=bottom}
    contents...
    :::
    ::::::::::::::

The `align` attributes on `columns` and `column` can be used with the
values `top`, `top-baseline`, `center` and `bottom` to vertically align
the columns. It defaults to `top` in `columns`.

The `totalwidth` attribute limits the width of the columns to the given
value.

    :::::::::::::: {.columns align=top .onlytextwidth}
    ::: {.column width="40%" align=center}
    contents...
    :::
    ::: {.column width="60%"}
    contents...
    :::
    ::::::::::::::

The class `onlytextwidth` sets the `totalwidth` to `\textwidth`.

See Section 12.7 of the [Beamer User’s
Guide](http://mirrors.ctan.org/macros/latex/contrib/beamer/doc/beameruserguide.pdf)
for more details.

## Frame attributes in beamer

Sometimes it is necessary to add the LaTeX `[fragile]` option to a frame
in beamer (for example, when using the `minted` environment). This can
be forced by adding the `fragile` class to the heading introducing the
slide:

    # Fragile slide {.fragile}

All of the other frame attributes described in Section 8.1 of the
[Beamer User’s
Guide](http://mirrors.ctan.org/macros/latex/contrib/beamer/doc/beameruserguide.pdf)
may also be used: `allowdisplaybreaks`, `allowframebreaks`, `b`, `c`,
`s`, `t`, `environment`, `label`, `plain`, `shrink`, `standout`,
`noframenumbering`, `squeeze`. `allowframebreaks` is recommended
especially for bibliographies, as it allows multiple slides to be
created if the content overfills the frame:

    # References {.allowframebreaks}

In addition, the `frameoptions` attribute may be used to pass arbitrary
frame options to a beamer slide:

    # Heading {frameoptions="squeeze,shrink,customoption=foobar"}

## Background in reveal.js, beamer, and pptx

Background images can be added to self-contained reveal.js slide shows,
beamer slide shows, and pptx slide shows.

### On all slides (beamer, reveal.js, pptx)

With beamer and reveal.js, the configuration option `background-image`
can be used either in the YAML metadata block or as a command-line
variable to get the same image on every slide.

Note that for reveal.js, the `background-image` will be used as a
`parallaxBackgroundImage` (see below).

For pptx, you can use a [reference doc](#option--reference-doc) in which
background images have been set on the [relevant
layouts](#powerpoint-layout-choice).

#### `parallaxBackgroundImage` (reveal.js)

For reveal.js, there is also the reveal.js-native option
`parallaxBackgroundImage`, which produces a parallax scrolling
background. You must also set `parallaxBackgroundSize`, and can
optionally set `parallaxBackgroundHorizontal` and
`parallaxBackgroundVertical` to configure the scrolling behaviour. See
the [reveal.js
documentation](https://revealjs.com/backgrounds/#parallax-background)
for more details about the meaning of these options.

In reveal.js’s overview mode, the parallaxBackgroundImage will show up
only on the first slide.

### On individual slides (reveal.js, pptx)

To set an image for a particular reveal.js or pptx slide, add
`{background-image="/path/to/image"}` to the first slide-level heading
on the slide (which may even be empty).

As the [HTML writers pass unknown attributes
through](#extension-link_attributes), other reveal.js background
settings also work on individual slides, including `background-size`,
`background-repeat`, `background-color`, `transition`, and
`transition-speed`. (The `data-` prefix will automatically be added.)

Note: `data-background-image` is also supported in pptx for consistency
with reveal.js – if `background-image` isn’t found,
`data-background-image` will be checked.

### On the title slide (reveal.js, pptx)

To add a background image to the automatically generated title slide for
reveal.js, use the `title-slide-attributes` variable in the YAML
metadata block. It must contain a map of attribute names and values.
(Note that the `data-` prefix is required here, as it isn’t added
automatically.)

For pptx, pass a [reference doc](#option--reference-doc) with the
background image set on the “Title Slide” layout.

### Example (reveal.js)

    ---
    title: My Slide Show
    parallaxBackgroundImage: /path/to/my/background_image.png
    title-slide-attributes:
        data-background-image: /path/to/title_image.png
        data-background-size: contain
    ---

    ## Slide One

    Slide 1 has background_image.png as its background.

    ## {background-image="/path/to/special_image.jpg"}

    Slide 2 has a special image for its background, even though the heading has no content.

